there's something beneficial in allowing
ourselves and in training ourselves to
be with that which is difficult in
ourselves in our partners in life
you know and that when we do that and i
think that's the detachment part that
you're keeping in your back pocket you
know when when we do that when we allow
ourselves to be uncomfortable when we
recognize that we're clinging a little
bit to the pleasures that can't be
sustained you know when we face those
issues
something settles down in us and we're
able to
actually deal more effectively with the
life that we're living with the hand
that we've been dealt
mark epstein welcome to the show thank
you tom very excited to have you as i
was saying before we started i
read the dow de jing when i was 16 and
it was utterly transformational i
studied buddhism in college but never
really got into it as a part of my life
but find myself now that i'm in my
mid-40s and i talk a lot about the
pursuit of fulfillment i find myself
talking about
detachment that people need to have what
i say have in their back pocket
detachment so if you're ever being
overwhelmed by
your pursuits that you remember that you
don't have to strive or cling as you
might say and i'd love to dive into
one just quickly give people
a thumbnail sketch of how you've used
buddhism in a traditional
therapy practice and then i want to get
into the tenants of buddhism okay
well buddhism and taoism
you know have a lot in common
and i read the dao teaching when i was
in the context of first learning about
buddhism eastern thought in general so
um that was like the first big
philosophical psychological emotional
spiritual
influence on me i was in what way so
you're 18 yeah it was freshman year in
college is that the first time you read
anything to do
anything to do with with eastern
philosophy and why did it hit you
um
there was a passage in a buddhist
collection of verse called the
dhammapada that's just entitled mind
so and i was orient i had some vague
notion that maybe i could be a
psychotherapist because it wasn't really
work and i liked people and you know i
was attuned to what was going on
emotionally but anyway i read this
chapter called mind and it had a
description of the untrained mind as
being like a fish thrown on dry ground
flapping all day long quivering and i
was like oh that's like what my mind is
maybe i should read on you know
and then started talking about how it
was possible to do something for a mind
like that and so i was immediately
pulled in
and then
you know i was a good reader so uh
every psychology course every
anthropology course every trip to the
spiritual bookstore which was called the
sphinx in the basement of a building in
harvard square you know would would turn
something up for me
um so i started delving in just all by
myself you know through the books but
then
circumstances led me to meet various
uh now important buddhist teachers who
became my friends and and really
influenced me uh and so i was like six
or seven years like buddhism was the
main thing i was interested in and then
i decided to go to medical school and
become a psychiatrist and really become
the therapist that i had imagined maybe
maybe that was some kind of work i could
do so going back to the fish flopping
and then
to buddhism i think that's part of why
daoism spoke to me so at 16 my mind is
going a mile a minute i am
in the grips of inferiority complex in
the extreme and
there was something about the
the concept of be like water of letting
go of not holding on to things of
there's there's just a
a serenity almost to the way that if
laozi was really a person like the way
that they can be a great therapist if
lazar was really a person
yeah and
is that the thing that keyed you in was
you could actually feel your mind
calming down
um
i think the thing that keyed me in was
was the beauty of the verse
you know that there was the possibility
of
my mind calming down or the possibility
of being something other than my
inferiority complex you know
i remember i went to a
a psychotherapist in those days that
they had at the university in the health
service
because i you know inferiority complex
is one way of describing you know how a
young man might feel you know
in his first or second year of college
and i remember i unburdened myself to
this guy who was a practitioner of
short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy
which was popular in those days in the
70s this was
i unburdened myself he was a very well
put together guy you know beautiful suit
really nice shoes i remember
and at the end of three sessions he said
oh you know your problem's there it's um
not that difficult you know it's like
basically the oedipus complex and i and
i was like oedipus complex like but he
didn't explain anything you know and so
uh so my condition had a name you know
but there was nothing that i could do
about it uh
and then i met these buddhist teachers
who joseph goldstein jack hornfield rahm
das sharon salzberg i met this whole
slew of buddhist teachers who were like
stop trying to figure out what's wrong
with you and just like pay attention to
who you are you know be more in what's
already there you know and they taught
me the very beginning of how to meditate
and and then i was like i can't really
do this you know like am i doing it
right
but i stayed with it
and
those questions are what everyone goes
through you know am i doing am i doing
it right so gradually
you know the the dow that can be named
is not the real dao you know so
so i stopped trying to figure out what
all this was about and just started to
do it and that gave me great confidence
um or great faith you might say and and
i've tried to bring that confidence or
that faith into
the practice of psychotherapy you know
where somehow
maybe i can
infuse a little bit of that into other
people's consciousness and to help them
settle their mind to help them settle
their mind or their heart open their
heart settle their heart you know be in
their body
connect their mind to their body connect
their heart to their mind their various
ways to talk about it it's really
interesting that that ends up being
sort of the core tenet of meditation is
be here be now there's something about
being grounded not letting your mind be
in the past or in the future that is
it would be a little hyperbolic of me to
say it saved my life but wow has it
impacted the quality of my life and
allowed me to and this is like the most
unbuddhist statement of all time but
it's allowed me to
go harder and faster towards my dreams
because i can carry a larger burden of
stress and i can deal with more things
because i know how to reset i don't
think that's unbuddhist at all i i think
the point the point of all of that
is to be able to actualize your
potential your individual potential you
know who you need to be
so it's to make you more you you know
in your own particular incarnation your
own particular way
so and then what you know watch out
world here you come what is that my
friends i am very excited to announce
that impact theory's major web 3 project
codenamed the avatar project is almost
here as most of you know for the past
year we've been focused on building the
future of this company in web 3. if
you've already joined us as a founder's
key holder you know exactly what i'm
talking about we have so many different
reveals for the project coming up guys
including the real name glimpses of the
characters the world and more so invite
you to join me in my discord channel for
more information and frequent
competitions and challenges when you
click the link on the screen you can
accept that invite and once you verify
that you're not a robot
with or without any knowledge of web3
you'll instantly be a part of the most
empowering community i've ever put
together and will make sure to keep you
up to date with upcoming news about
avatar get ready to level up click the
link and join me in the discord until
then be legendary take care peace
so let's get into the tenets of buddhism
because until i read your book and you
introduced me to a new word which i have
no doubt will be where you start by
explaining the four noble truths
um
but my takeaway of the buddhist
teachings and probably the reason that i
didn't pursue it in the way that i
pursued taoism was it was a sense of
like life is suffering and you have to
detach in order to navigate it well and
i was like ah to me buddhism felt like
the choice in fact i will say that
buddhism until i read your book
which was very recent
i would have described as
detachment versus
engagement and so because i i liked as i
was saying before we started rolling i
keep detachment in my back pocket to
make sure that i never get overwhelmed
but
i want to engage
and you have a very different way of
explaining
the buddhist philosophy and i'd love to
hear it
well
before i explain it you know the point
of detachment is engagement
so that's the that's the you know what
are you detaching from you're detaching
from trying to control everything too
much you know in this world that's
filled with uncertainty
so we try to control as much as we can
that's the job of the ego and we can do
a lot but we can't do everything so then
the detachment comes in you know not
clinging to the pleasant not pushing
away the unpleasant that's the training
of the mind that you start to do in
meditation so people often misunderstand
the buddha's teachings like oh it's just
life is suffering it's too depressing
the point is to you know stop trying to
be happy and
accept the suffering
that's a misunderstanding in my view of
what the buddha taught so the buddha
laid out his psychological teachings the
first time he decided to speak
or at the second time really but
very early in his teaching career he
laid out his psychological spiritual
teachings in the form of the four noble
truths
and he did it in the way that medical
practitioners of uh of his time talked
about illness and suffering so he he
first gave the diagnosis of the
condition then he gave the cause then he
gave the treatment
and in between he said there's a a
solution you know so
when he gave the cause
when when he named sorry when he named
the
the condition he just used a single word
and the word he used was dukkha which i
think is what you were referencing
before so
he just said dukkha and that's been
translated as suffering but a better
translation would be
a kind of sense of
unsatisfactoriness that permeates our
experience he didn't deny pleasure
he didn't he didn't deny happiness but
he said that even with pleasurable
experiences you know they always end at
some point so there's always a kind of
leftover
you know
bittersweetness even to intense pleasure
because there's something in us that
doesn't let go easily that wants more
that gets a little bit uncomfortable you
know when it ebbs out
so
that sense of unsatisfactoriness he
called dukkha
but if you take the word apart the word
dukkha it actually means hard to face
so ka means face dukkha
is like difficult there's another word
sukkah which means sweet to face which
is the pleasure of life you know but the
buddha said there's this quality of
dukkha there's this quality of
experience that's hard to face and our
instinctual tendency this gets to the
second noble truth our instinctual
tendency is to turn away from that which
is hard to face you know and the buddha
said actually the reason i'm teaching
meditation and so on is because that's
training in facing that which is hard to
face
and that there's something beneficial
and so this is what i've tried to bring
into the practice of psychotherapy
there's something beneficial in allowing
ourselves and in training ourselves to
be with that which is difficult in
ourselves in our partners in life
you know and that when we do that and i
think that's the detachment part that
you're keeping in your back pocket you
know when when we do that when we allow
ourselves to be uncomfortable when we
recognize that we're clinging a little
bit to the pleasures that can't be
sustained you know when we face those
issues
something settles down in us and we're
able to
actually deal more effectively with the
life that we're living with the hand
that we've been dealt
okay that is
that was really revolutionary for me the
idea that this was not about detachment
and moving into the mountains and being
completely removed which was the thing
that never sat well it felt like i was
gonna miss out on something you're
already in the mountains yeah that i i
found something so pleasurable about
going after something but that yeah the
pursuit was incredibly dangerous
emotionally unfortunately i learned this
firsthand but it was incredibly
dangerous emotionally if i was valuing
myself based on whether i achieved the
thing
and it was dangerous emotionally not
because i wasn't even necessarily going
to achieve it but that even in
achievement i couldn't stand in that
achievement that it was temporary by its
nature it was fleeting and i became
obsessed with this idea of you're having
a biological experience
and what i mean by that is your
neurochemistry is going to change and it
could change because we have this sort
of lingering sense of unease that i know
that this is going to pass or just that
that's the way the world works and you
can never eat a meal so grand that
you're never hungry again you can never
drink a glass of water that's so thirst
quenching that you
never get thirsty again and
so i was like okay this doesn't make
sense so i need to change how i think
about it but i
it's really a puzzle piece coming
together for me to think of it is
these are things that are difficult to
face that is the nature of being human
and most importantly if you're trying to
not face them it becomes more
problematic not less
why
though well there's something in in the
way you're describing your own
experience
that speaks to a kind of perfectionism i
think that a lot of ambitious talented
people
have to deal with
where there's there's um
you know striving and success but the
success is never enough
because there's always somebody else
who's more successful
you know or you've reached this plateau
and then as you said
you you did it and then what's the next
thing and often there's a lot of
insecurity underneath the
perfectionistic striving
so
the buddhist thing comes in
you know to help with that the the
buddha himself was one of these
perfectionists you know you know before
he got enlightened he was trying all the
spiritual practices of his day you know
that were like ascetic practices not
eating all you know he was into fasting
he he was into yoga
he was into all kinds of meditation that
took him out of his body rather than
keeping him connected to the earth you
know
and he kept getting as far as you could
go you know he was like the the best
yoga student the best faster he was the
best anorectic you know like uh
uh only eating like the purest foods
that that that no one had ever touched
you know and none of them were working
you know none of them were working and
that's the kind of
thing that in in our world where so much
success is possible so much achievement
really is achievable
you know but people still are coming up
against the limits of their own minds
and that happened to the buddha that's
why it's so touching you know his own
story his own teachings and it wasn't
until
he had a childhood memory the buddha it
wasn't until he remembered himself as a
young boy
sitting under a rose apple tree like
sort of blissing out under the tree
while his father was in the distance
plowing in the fields and at the height
of his perfectionistic striving his
aesthetic practices he remembered
himself as a young boy under the tree
and and i always think that's the first
kind of self-analysis that ever happened
historically although maybe socrates you
know
but he said to himself why am i thinking
of this now like what is this trying to
tell me you know maybe my all my
striving is like the wrong way to the
awakening to the enlightenment that i'm
seeking maybe i should listen to this
feeling of being a young boy under the
tree feeling joyful you know maybe
there's some kind of joyfulness that's
intrinsic to who i am that i'm not
paying attention to that i should learn
how to
uh incorporate into
you know my regular life
and
he he remembered that feeling and then
he said to himself yes i think i'm going
to try that direction
and then
right away a young woman appears you
know bearing a bowl of rice porridge you
know to feed the the hungry buddha
because he thinks to himself you know
with a body so emaciated i'll never be
able to sustain this joyful feeling that
i'm remembering
so there's something about allowing the
actually the joy you know not the
suffering that is deep in the buddha's
teachings that i think we need in
today's psychotherapy you know just the
the analyst telling me that i was
suffering from my oedipus complex wasn't
going to help me you know the way
finding finding that joy in my own in my
own heart uh has helped me
all right at some point we need to come
back to the other three noble truths but
in i can do it quickly for you um
let's come back because you just said
something that i think is really
interesting so
in the book you talk about some pretty
difficult cases people that really had
some profound childhood trauma
and
how do they find their joy like what is
that unwinding i have a lot of people
asking me about childhood trauma i've
had childhood trauma experts on
childhood trauma freaks me out it's one
of the reasons that i don't have
children
is that oh god i don't remember who said
it plato aristotle maybe
the only impossible job is raising
children and that strikes me as
absolutely true
how if you have gone through a
significant childhood trauma and you're
in your 40s or whatever like how do you
begin to unwind that and let that joy
express itself
well that's where that's where the
buddha's first teachings are really
helpful
that there's an aspect to experience
that's hard to face
so
that could be a deep childhood trauma it
often is you know or it could be
something much more subtle
like
in childhood where
parents are too busy too depressed too
drunk
too involved in their own careers to
give the kind of attention that every
child deserves and every child needs so
more of an absence instead of a presence
that's a kind of trauma also but
many of us are carrying some kind of
trauma and the the tendency with all
trauma is to try to look away to try to
be normal so people spend a lot of
energy tensing
their emotional bodies up to avoid
what they actually have already
experienced and then unfortunately the
tendency is to project we say to project
those
traumatic elements
to the present or onto the future so to
be afraid that you know their grown-up
partner is going to hurt them the way
their
father hurt them that kind of thing or
that the world is going to collapse the
way
a a child's world seemed to collapse so
the psychotherapeutic approach in my
view to dealing with trauma is to help a
person very very gradually
to begin to experience
the traumatic
remnant
of what did or did not happen to them
you know to sort of lower them in very
very slowly the way you would go into
very cold water you know like like an
inch at a time kind of thing but if
you've ever done that it becomes
tolerable if you know if you go slowly
enough
so
once the
emotional stuff gets metabolized or
digested i i try to say
um then
we're not
the only the traumatized person
you know like um i spent a lot of time
when i was younger with with ramdas uh
the former richard alpert who became a
friend and a teacher and what i always
remember from him saying to me it was
you're not who you think you are
mark you're not who you think you are
it's like not who i think i am you know
but i think that applies even to people
who have been really badly traumatized
you know they're not only the trauma
you know and so once they
um
once they start relating to their
traumatic history in a different way
then then the potential exists for them
to experience themselves
as not only the trauma like my one of my
good meditation teachers joseph
goldstein always says
it's not
what you're experiencing or what you've
experienced that matters it's how you
relate to it
so so that's become like a mantra for me
you know it's not what you've
experienced that matters it's how you
relate to it that we actually have the
capacity to change how we relate to
experience that's fundamental to the
buddha's teachings
and that's what's healing
okay that's that is such an important
concept and so big and so hard to convey
so i just wrote this thing that i called
the life map
and it's trying to get across that
concept what i call frame of reference
your frame of reference is to you what
water is to a fish they don't realize
that they're in it or that there is any
sense of not being in it
it just is and finding something to peel
away so that you can get under it and
realize oh my god like this is a
construct of my own making i have
built a relationship to this trauma
which does not strike me as a
constructed relationship it strikes me
as
merely
recognizing the fundamental truth of the
matter
how do you help people other than slowly
getting into the emotion how do you get
them to see that like you you have
constructed something that the trauma
yes is real it happened but you've
created a way of looking at it thinking
about it whatever that's now
marring your present and thusly your
future yeah
well
that question like how do i actually
help people
um
is
is why i wrote the book
um because the book
describes
the zen of therapy uncovering a hidden
kindness in life it's why i wrote it
because the the
the book is basically centered on a
year's worth of psychotherapy sessions
that i picked randomly so not following
the same patients but
um sessions where i felt oh maybe i
helped this person a little bit in this
session like like how did i help them
because because i think
psychotherapy really it's such an act of
faith like you know like two people
sitting and talking and you're supposed
to feel better out of this conversation
and what am i what am i doing anything
really like that's always in the same
way i was questioning when i first
started to meditate am i doing it right
you know like as a therapist it's such a
like i trust i trust that i'm
people keep coming back so and they say
i'm helping them but how am i helping
them and
how is the buddhist thing involved in
that
i'm never
i'm never totally sure
but because all i'm doing
is engaging in the conversation you know
i want to know what's going on inside of
them but i can usually
sense or feel
how or where
they're
shutting down
around themselves you know where they
have decided
this is who i am i'm this kind of person
this is what happened to me this is my
limitation this is all i can do
and there's something in me
as a therapist that's always
pushing against that
you know like like um
i think it's like a martial arts sort of
thing you you know uh but gentler and
getting them to reframe it's like i'm
joking i'm i'm trying to it's getting
them to reframe yes but but i'm trying
to
uh insinuate myself into their mind in
in some way that they then start
questioning what they're saying like
this isn't the only way to see like
maybe you're misconstruing like what
about this
you know so i'm playing with them in a
certain
mental way
but but i can only do that if they're
really trusting if they like me
if they're really trusting me you know
i'd love to give people an example so
there's one in the book that's profound
which is the child of the two holocaust
survivors
that was a pretty magical reframe do you
mind walking people through no i'd be
happy to that's the first one in the
book
um so
a
patient named jack who i've seen for a
long time
um
son of two holocaust survivors
grew up poor in
brooklyn
both his parents parents each had
children
before the war who got stripped away
when they got taken to the concentration
camps and killed
the the the father got swept up uh right
when the war began and ended up in
auschwitz and then on a death march etc
the mother was from
vilnius educated family two children
lost the children anyway the parents met
in a displaced person camp after the war
they walked to france
they
came to brooklyn
and they had my patient
and he's brilliant he went to
city universities brilliant guy
ended up in therapy with me
and
he would always come into the session
like
mark when when will i ever be healed
when will i ever be healed and it was a
refrain
and when he was younger the refrain to
his parents were
was
was i a good boy today
uh because my sense was he felt his
parents suffering but they never talked
about it you know once he overheard not
once probably more than once he
overheard them with other holocaust
survivors they would have conversations
you know like do you remember the dogs
kind of those kind of conversations but
but um
they couldn't talk about the
the
previous children or any so so my
patient jack he would feel the parents
pain
pain as children do he would take
responsibility for it so if he was a
better boy if he was a better student
you know maybe they would smile you know
um
so uh
they're now deceased the he's now my age
um he's in the office with me when will
i ever be healed
and
i had this like sudden flash
you don't need to be healed you were the
healer
you know like imagine your parents
losing those children and then they come
to this country and they have you
you know they like
as difficult as it might have been for
them to show you
you know imagine how
incredible that was for them you know
you and your sister
you know and
and then i thought of
um there's a buddhist
saint basically a buddhist bodhisattva
in china and japan
and tibet in in china and japan
she is called kuan yin or kannan
and then in tibet somehow she became a
man and
he is called avalokiteshvara
but kuan yin the chinese version or
japanese version
kuan yin means the word the name
translates as she who hears our cries so
i asked jack you know have you ever
heard of this no
let me tell you about quan yin you know
she who hears our cries
you were like you were like kuan yin you
heard their cries you came down you let
yourself incarnate you know you're the
healer
and
he heard me
you know he heard me
and for a moment he felt it
you know so instead of
when will he ever be healed which is
sort of what i was saying before like
the old trauma
being perpetuated and projected onto the
present and the future you know like
there was something wrong he didn't know
what it was there's still something
wrong he's incorporated into himself
there's something wrong with me
you know so for a moment i got him out
of that you know
by talking this buddhist stuff
and
he
uh you know i sent him with all the
patients in the book when i wrote the
session up uh i sent it to him to review
and so
the these sessions that were
uh momentary and fleeting got kind of
locked down in an anti-buddhist way you
know preserved but so it's become a
really nice touchstone um for us and
uh he said he's got lots of statues of
kuan yin now
in his in his home so
the idea of a bodhisattva is really
interesting somebody that
is enlightened but instead of going do
they transcend a nirvana is that the
idea well they it's like what is nirvana
you know that's a basic buddhist
in some views of nirvana nirvana is like
over there somewhere like like outside
the universe like the buddha checks out
you know but
after a couple of hundred years the
people who were actually experiencing
nirvana started to question that whole
view and they were like samsara which is
this world samsara is nirvana you know
there's nowhere to go it's just we're
misperceiving what this world is all
about so when we get enlightened we
start to see that oh nirvana is it's
it's right here right now it's all
around us there's nothing there's
nowhere else to go there's nothing to do
but to stay here and help other
you know unfortunate people who haven't
yet realized that we're in a beautiful
place we're not in a hell zone you know
despite what's going on around us
um so uh the bodhisattva is committed to
helping others because there's nothing
else to do they're already enlightened
they see it you know it's like they've
taken the ayahuasca or whatever they but
but it's not a fleeting experience they
know it and so then they become
committed to helping others so in tibet
when when kuan yin became a male figure
and became avalokiteshvara they portray
him with a thousand arms so why does he
have a thousand arms because he's
reaching down for to all the drowning
people to like pull them up out of their
own ignorance you know out of their own
suffering out of their own tears
um so he's got a thousand arms because
he's doing it for everybody you know
that's so interesting that always i
remember learning about that very early
on in my exploration of buddhism and i
thought that's a really
cool idea of somebody sticking around
the way that i had heard it was maybe
my misunderstanding but that they could
be you know um go up and become a god
but instead they go around on the wheel
of um reincarnation and they just keep
coming back over and over and over to
help people
i always found that a a heartwarming
definitely heartwarming yeah it's really
cool all right what are the other three
noble truths the first noble truth is
dukkha there is this unsatisfactoriness
that we um
ordinarily can't escape from the second
noble truth is the cause of the
unsatisfactoriness
is clinging or craving or ignorance or
delusion you know that we
misperceive reality
and in so doing we
hold on to the pleasant push away the
unpleasant or if there's something
perverse in us we hold on to the
unpleasant and push away the pleasant
but whatever we're doing we're relating
in a strange way to reality that's the
second noble truth the cause the third
noble truth is nirvana you know there is
escape there is a way out and the way
out is to change how we relate how we
think how we perceive
and the fourth noble truth is the path
you know how do we change our view of
reality and it has to do with
uh right thought
right motivation right energy right
effort right concentration right
mindfulness there's a slew of
the eightfold path it's called but it's
basically a way of of training the mind
and body
and and meditation is only you know
a couple of limbs of the eightfold path
people tend to think that it's all about
meditation but meditation is one tool
um that the buddha talked about another
very important one is right speech
and right speech uh in its lowest form
people say oh don't gossip you know but
right speech has a lot to do with how we
talk to ourselves
so uh the the eightfold path is a way of
introducing us to our own inner
experience and making us conscious of
all the ways that we're
telling stories to ourselves that aren't
necessarily true
okay the eightfold path is gonna be
really important but first i want to
talk about clinging
so you've given us a definition that
we're misunderstanding the nature of the
world but it does feel quite wise to me
to pursue
pleasure and to eschew pain certainly
from
how do we get here so i'm taking a very
um
evolutionary approach to saying okay
this is what kept us alive this long
maybe in a modern context it has some
pathology or maybe always it had some
pathology but at least it kept us alive
long enough to have kids that have kids
why would it be
an improper understanding of the world
to try to cling to pleasure and push
away pain
it's not an improper understanding it's
an instinctual thing
so you're absolutely right biologically
and so on it it's gotten us very far
it's just it has limits you know so we
always come up against it so even you
know driving in los angeles when there's
a lot of traffic you know like you're
stuck in the traffic
so what can you do you know
you can make yourself as comfortable as
possible in the car you can listen to a
podcast you can put on the air
conditioning you know but if you have to
get somewhere and you're stuck what can
you do so
that
that aspect of life is present
incontrovertibly you know coveted you're
like where did that come from
why won't it go away
how are we gonna deal with this you know
we do our best you know we work from
home we we stop going out we do you know
then it's like years later what do we
what do we do something has to change in
the way that we're relating
to the world you know because there's an
unpleasant thing going on you know and
that's just coveted
you know so
um you could look at it from that
perspective the other way that i talk
about it a lot
is around having children
is with young babies you know when
you're a parent of a young child it is
not an entirely pleasant experience you
know and
and the child
is not an entirely pleasant being as
cute as they are they're they're a
ruthless ball of every emotion that
humans are capable of all fused into one
thing and they're throwing that at you
and as the parent you have to deal with
it you know so if you get offended
because your child is
is exploding with anger or
need
at you if you get if you
um
push away if you if you push the child
away or if you yourself pull away then
what kind of parent are you being so
being being a good enough parent
requires staying with the unpleasant
aspects of
having children
you know and that's a huge task that so
many of us really really struggle with
and the but the buddhist
teaching is such a help because it's
what it's saying is
this aspect of experience is unavoidable
and we can find our best selves by
staying with it
you know uh rather than trying to get
away from it and as a therapist i can i
can
assert how important that is for people
you know because the child like my
patient i told you about the child feels
the parents pain and assumes that they
are the cause and sometimes they are but
then in that example yes but then they
become
you know it's not just oh i was hungry
and my mom couldn't find the milk you
know it was like there's something
fundamentally wrong with me
you know that children begin to take
that in and then that becomes such a
source of identity and shame that people
are struggling with long into adulthood
[Music]
yeah it's interesting that feels like
that brings us back to this idea of
reframing that really what you're doing
okay i'm stuck in traffic
there's nothing for me to do and if
there is by all means do it but if
there's no way for me to not be stuck in
traffic i can either sit here and be
wound up and be angry and wind myself up
and make it worse or i can reframe it
and
would the buddhist encouragement be to
find something beautiful in that moment
or to just good luck accept like what's
the take no the well the buddhist thing
would be
you always have your breath
and you know the breath and be grateful
or you have your breath to sort of
modulate your neurochemistry uh
the the um the buddha didn't know about
the neurochemistry and those words but
he knew about the breath so you you
always have the breath the breath is
like the
often the central object of meditation
so it's like the place of refuge for for
many people it doesn't work for
everybody some
some traumatized people
the breath is too fraught but for many
people the breath is because their mind
is just going to be replete with
negative memories because they were
hiding in a closet while their parents
were
screaming at each other and they were
holding their breath
you know basically
um some version of that so the so the
ease with the breath that we look for in
meditation is hard to find for some
people and for those people there are
other objects like just the sounds that
uh are ever present even within silence
that can become a central object of
meditation instead
um
but uh but from for many people the
breath works it's a neutral
it's a neutral object it connects us to
the outside world you know is the breath
in me or is it out there
so when you're sitting in traffic if
you're not just listening to the radio
or whatever but you're starting to get
frustrated
you can
bring your attention
just to the actual physical sensation of
the breath as it enters and leaves the
nostrils and just that is like a cue
into
the
possibility of of inner peace that is
always with you you know lurking in the
background even on the highway you know
even when your child is
um screaming at you
you know even when you're frustrated
it's possible to
turn away from the frustration to the
object of meditation
okay and the purpose of that would be to
again calm the mind yeah to not cling to
the emotion because your book has a
really interesting relationship to anger
and aggression
now might be the time so we have
we can
try to suppress our anger which a lot of
people do and they develop a very
unhealthy relationship which you catalog
in the book really extraordinary i
remember at one point stopping going
what's the title of this section because
i was listening to it
and aggression and i was like it's
interesting you're talking about kids a
lot and aggression and i was like this
is not what i expected like there was
such a level of honesty
and um sort of forthrightness about how
to have a relationship with anger i was
like in a book called the xenotherapy i
was just so
pleasantly surprised
so
we have what you just described which is
you can sort of turn away to the breath
so that the anger dissipates i would
assume hopefully yeah
how do we what kind of relationship
should we have to anger
the relationship that i'm
reaching for
that we
maybe could have to anger
uh tiknot han the vietnamese buddhist
teacher who died not that long ago used
to say
hold anger like a baby
okay
hold anger like a baby so what does that
mean does that mean
hold anger the way you know rock it like
you rock a baby or does it mean
hold anger the way a baby holds anger
you know so i think he probably meant
the former but but but there's some way
to think about it as the latter also
because
in meditation
yes the first thing we do is use the
breath as a kind of neutral object to
quiet the mind calm the body down
turn away from the frustration but
where meditation goes when you practice
it for a while is that
everything becomes an object of
meditation
so
the anger itself becomes an object of
meditation the burglar alarm going off
becomes an object of meditation the flat
tire that i had the first day i rented a
car a couple of weeks ago had to become
an object of meditation you know your
own emotional experience your own
thoughts become objects of meditation
because you're changing the way that
you're relating to them that's that
fundamentally saying that it's an object
of meditation what do you mean exactly
well as human beings we're capable of
being both the thinker and the
observer of the thought
you know we're both subject and object
we have this self-reflective capacity
you know
where we look in the mirror and we know
that's us or we're thinking our thoughts
and we know we're thinking our thoughts
so it's a very weird
thing evolutionarily we've become
capable of this
so
um you can be angry
and then there's somewhere in you
like in buddhism they call it a spy
consciousness that's like off to the
side that knows that you're angry and
can see can feel the anger bubbling and
can can witness the angry thoughts
so what we're doing in meditation is
we're reinforcing
that
observational capacity
that is inherent in all of us
so we're moving from
figure to ground would be another way of
saying it you know
figure to ground like like figure
the the cup you know and ground is the
space around the cup so we think we're
the cup like i'm just this angry person
you know or you're or you're pissed at
me and you know but there's all this
space around the anger you know that's
the observational capacity of the mind
so we're we're training ourselves to be
able to be in both places at once you
know or to oscillate back and forth
between
this is me and then oh
you know and i think that's the
relaxation that you felt in the taoist
way of thinking right from from the
beginning you know that you were talking
so
um
so once you
once you realize that that's a
possibility then
uh that possibility is with you all the
time so that so then you realize that
you aren't the anger itself yeah you're
not just the difficulty that you're that
you're facing the immediate difficulty
you know that you have to deal with but
and you could be involved in dealing
with it but you also can be
like sort of watching it from the side
and that ability to be
also watching it from the side gives you
a lot more choice in how you're dealing
with the situation
so instead of just like oh so we're
talking about about children and you
know young raising
uh infants and so on so
um the the infant is having a hard time
uh and you don't know what to do
and uh the impulse comes to like just
shut up or
you know but
most mothers won't
resort to that because there's some kind
of inherent maternal
understanding
in
in buddhist meditation we're reinforcing
that kind of inherent maternal
understanding you know like we still see
oh shut up comes up in our minds you
know but it's just a thought like we can
just witness it as a thought instead of
being propelled
by it
you know so that's what the buddha in in
the eightfold path called right action
you know instead of taking the bait our
own bait
it you know instead of taking our own
bait and then
acting destructively which we're all
capable of doing we learn to recognize
the destructive impulse and that's what
a lot of that last section of the book
is about about aggression and so on we
learned to recognize the destructive
impulse not to judge it you know
to to recognize that
yes we're feeling that way because we
wish that things weren't the way that
they are
or interpersonally like this happens in
intimate relationships uh a lot you know
i i wish that you were more
uh what i need you to be
you know and you're not
you know and
where are you you know and that pisses
me off you know the way you're talking
to me and so on but then
if i can work with my own anger in this
way that we're talking somewhere along
the way i recognize that oh you're
actually a separate person who i don't
have control over you know who i have to
figure out how to relate to kindly
you know so uh
working with my own anger
ultimately leads me to a place of
empathy
to a place of kindness to the other
person that i'm involved with it can be
a long process but that but that's the
um that's the trajectory
the idea of the ego
you've sort of danced with it a little
bit here you go into more detail and i
can't remember if it's in the book or
just talks i've heard you give but
um
are we trying to get rid of the ego is
that a thrust of buddhism or is it just
a changing relationship to the ego
how would you define the ego
the the it's not trying to get rid of
the ego because we need the ego for what
um we need the ego for for dealing with
the immediate problems that we face
that that's what the the ego is all
about dealing with the immediate it it's
a mediator in fact you you know the the
the ego is like you know on the iphone
the thing that counts your steps
that that people are so into the ego is
like counting your steps you know it's
like this is what you have to do today
you know this is in order to
satisfy the demands of the environment
you know be a good person
uh you need the ego to like put the
garbage out on the right nights and
separate the recyclables from from the
rest you need the ego to do your
homework you know and to recognize that
my wife is a separate person for me and
is an autonomous being
true
you need the ego even to meditate you
know to to sit down on the cushion and
watch your breath that's an ego function
you know so the ego is like moving us
around in the world you know that's how
and the ego develops in the uh
the first couple of years of life as the
child realizes that oh they have a mind
and that they're separate from their
mother from their father they have to
deal with them
you know and the ego recognizes that oh
i'm just this little person in this in
this world that's full of big people and
there's so many more of them and what
and i have to go to school and what
learned to read and what how to go to
the bathroom and wipe myself you know
that's all ego stuff
and the ego wants to be in control
and thinks it should be able to be in
control of everything
but you and we all know people who are
so into their egos that they're
impossible to be around because they're
trying to control everything including
you
you know so
the buddha recognized and
western psychotherapists also recognize
that the ego is not everything that one
of the things the ego has to learn to do
is to
relax itself
to unburden itself
that we don't have to be integrated all
the time as i'm mark and i know who i am
and so on that there's something called
unintegration
that happens when
i'm reading a book or taking a walk in
the woods or
after sex
or
making art
or you know
listening to music so much cultural
activity is about
allowing yourself to settle into an
unintegrated state
that which is different from
disintegrating the way a crazy person
yeah would be define the difference um
in unintegration the ego is like safely
put aside is this like the zone
it could be like the zone it could be
like the zone it when the buddha
remembered himself sitting under the
rose apple tree with a joyful feeling
it's kind of blissing out under the tree
knowing that his father was there in the
distance that was a state of
unintegration
okay when you're in church
and
people are singing together
you know and you're caught up in the
swell of
uh
the group
activity
that that's a state of unintegration
when you're playing basketball and
you're you know you're
sinking the baskets and getting you can
feel the ball coming before you know the
zone that's a state of unintegration
it's there it comes you know there's so
many different uh
uh ways that it can manifest itself um
but the and that's very enriching for
the ego that's very sustained the ego
doesn't need or doesn't want
uh actually to be in control all the
time you know we just need it for
certain things and then we have to learn
to let it go that can be scary for
people they feel especially people who
were traumatized when they were young
and not uh didn't have the ego support
that
parents who are present but not too
present give to a young child you know
that's why the buddhist father plowing
in the fields is like one of our parents
like making dinner in the kitchen and
we're on the floor in the living room
like playing our games and imagining
playing out stories you know imagination
is also
where we go when we're in a state of
unintegration so that's all pleasurable
really and tolerable disintegration is
what you see in a schizophrenic
person or in someone who's going through
a manic episode where they can't control
all the stuff that's coming in inner and
outer has become one and there's no
uh processing function that's left
inside the brain you know that's a
dysfunctional kind of time so or someone
with a panic attack uh you know where
the anxiety has just taken over that's
like a state of disintegration that's
very unpleasant
um but so
so we need the ego but we don't need it
all the time right
okay eightfold path
so
one
is there i don't know if you have them
memorized but if you do just a quick
run through
at a high level of what they are and
then i'm
i know i'm super interested in learning
more about meditation and how to
leverage that but there might be more on
the eightfold path that we should talk
about um the faithful path is basically
just a way of cataloging
that
we can
learn to apply
this basic teaching
of
not clinging uh in every aspect of life
so
uh the first couple of limbs of the
eightfold path are about uh right
understanding about right thought
uh so it's like
how we're thinking about things do we
think that
this
reality
where
our impulses are
driving us you know is this the right
way to be living or the wrong way to be
living you know you know so with right
with right thought with right
understanding we start to question the
way ramdas is uh uh questioned to me you
know like you're not who you think you
are you know that's right thought you're
not who you think you are you know
rather than buying into
everything that your thoughts are
telling you
and so is that the idea of
recognizing you're not who you think you
are just so you don't over invest in the
story that you're replaying in your mind
totally is that to give you flexibility
so that you can
you talked earlier about realizing your
potential which i was not expecting you
to say which is super encouraging um
is that the idea that if i if i'm too
fixated on who i think i am then i don't
open myself up to what else could be
absolutely okay absolutely and that you
know uncertainty is such a
uh fact of life
you know so how do we navigate
uncertainty you know doing do we
navigate it by trying to be certain all
the time it you know that gets us
you know
part way there
but the taoist thing is you know like
flexibility like you're saying how do we
how do we work with
uh
that we don't know what's coming in the
next moment
you know we what's death going to be
like you know like
let alone life
so yes that's what that's what all that
is about okay
and then
the next the next three aspects of the
eightfold path are all about being in
the world they're all about relationship
to the world it's like right livelihood
right speech those kinds of right action
i think those are the three
so
um
and that you can think about them in a
sort of superficial way or you can kind
of probe into them and try to get a
little deeper with them so so write
speech as i mentioned before can just be
about like not idly gossiping but it can
also be about you know like how are we
talking to ourselves
um right livelihood can be about like
not trading in arms you know um
but it can also be about
no matter what you're doing
working for the benefit of others which
would be you know sort of where the
buddhist thing is leading
and then the last
chunk of the eightfold path is about
meditation it's about how important it
is to train the mind and so there's
right concentration and right
mindfulness and what are we training the
mind to do exactly uh we're training the
mind
to
know itself
fully
and therefore to be able to be in the
world
as
i like to say partners with the
capacities that constitute us
so
that that's another way of saying
realizing your full potential
partners part of our capacity with the
capacities that constitute us
is that
is that talking about
the malleability of that and that okay i
have my potential but i actually have to
go acquire skills so that that sequence
is how i think through life but i think
it's more you you having your potential
but you have to find it
you know because we don't
we i mean certainly my experience was
like i don't know who i am
you know like like here i am you know i
like went to school i was good in school
but i don't you know but inside like
what what you you know so
so
i mean i'm just talking super personally
but
that process of
actually being okay with
not being sure
about who or what i was
you know the the buddhist thing gave me
permission
to not be sure
you know because it talks so much about
non-self you know and emptiness of self
you know you've talked about that though
as like a womb versus a void
which i found really interesting yeah so
well because that's what it became you
know so so i was troubled
because i don't i don't know who i am
you know and what am i supposed to be
what am i doing here and and what am i
capable of you know all that sort of
insecurity
um
and
one the normal way of dealing with that
you know would be okay i'm going to go
to medical school and become a doctor
and now i'm a doctor and you know like
so you have to listen to me because i
know what's best for you or whatever uh
and my father was a doctor so that so
that was sort of obvious and i did
become a doctor
um
but
what the what the buddhist uh
approach gave me was
and meeting those first meditation
teachers and what they were saying to me
was
you know you don't really have to know
the way you think you have to know like
why don't you just relax and feel
yourself you know like why don't you
just leave yourself alone and be
and and i tried to go there in the book
like what what is all this about being
being rather than doing you know because
i think it was so important for me so so
why don't you leave yourself alone why
don't you just like let yourself be why
don't you see who you are that way why
don't you discover who you are by
relating you know naturally to the world
to other people to yourself you know
okay how
you know well i'll give you some
teachings about that this is what right
concentration is this is what right
mindfulness is why don't you go sit on
that cushion over there and practice
with yourself you know and just just
sit there and try being with yourself
you know in an open non-judgmental
uh kind way and see
what you become
what do you do if you do that and you
don't like what you see
fine you that's a lot of the experience
you know that's why so much of the book
ends up talking about
anger and aggression and frustration and
so on that's
you know there's a whole aspect to life
that
we want to look away from that's dukkha
you know that's going to be there so
that's to be expected so then you have
to learn
to
you know okay how how can i be with that
which i don't want to see about myself
you know my own inner violence for
instance
you know so i can come to terms with
that and then oh those are just thoughts
you know that's just a feeling
you know
okay so this gets to one of the reasons
that i think people struggle with
meditation is that they say it's so
unpleasant yeah they sit down and
suddenly their thoughts are unfettered
so you either are dealing with a monkey
mind and your mind is just racing like
crazy and you're thinking about your
grocery list and all the things you have
to get done and
oh god the kids are freaking out or they
have a dental appointment or i have a
dentist appointment whatever and you've
got that side but then you've also got
what might be worse but takes time to
get to which is maybe even more
terrifying which is
all of the trifling things fall away and
you get to some deep wound that you're
worrying over or or you get to all the
people you've hurt
you know i think that might be even more
painful
you know we we think about the deep
wounds and that does come up for people
but
there are these other kind of wounds
like all the people all the people that
we've heard like na what what where
people go when they get sober you know
and they have to make amends
or they want to make amends
that that kind of stuff comes up too and
that's very hard to look at very painful
you know people you've lost or people
you've hurt or your own destructive
actions you know let's take a really
gnarly one you've hurt somebody that has
since passed away yeah and now there's
no making it right right now what
yeah you you um
instead of looking away from that
instead of tensing up or feeling ashamed
you know in a self-destructive way
you
acknowledge
and you feel
the pain of that
and in the buddhist psychology they they
divide um
emotional and
cognitive experiences up into helpful
and unhelpful you know wholesome and
unwholesome categories and they have one
that's called remorse
you know which is a wholesome helpful
healthy
uh
feeling mental feeling
so i think a remorse that would come up
in that kind of situation
you fill your mind with it you know you
let it you let it
get as big as it could be
you know sitting on a meditation retreat
you know for as long as it
you know and you breathe uh in and out
uh with the feelings of remorse now is
there some sense of like that is the
therapy where i'm gonna sit with it i'm
not fighting it i'm not clinging to it
i'm letting it be it's getting big i'm
like just letting it go as much as it
needs to
i don't see why somebody would do that
if that isn't ultimately going to be
therapeutic
it's therapeutic in the sense that it's
um
supporting that aspect of the eightfold
path
uh
you know right action in this case where
it's gonna guard you against doing it
again
you know because you've really felt
you know
there's a story in the buddhist time of
a murderer
named angulimala
and angulimala means like a
something like a mandala of fingers he
had the thumbs he had the severed thumbs
of all the people he had murdered in a
necklace around his neck
and yeah and he comes to the buddha and
he becomes a uh
a great student of the buddhas a great
enlightened
being but in order to get there he had
to
uh you know feel the destruction that he
had wrought upon the world you know
um
and so by allowing that to happen he's
able to somehow transcend it
because when i think about and i mean
look you know better than i as a
therapist but when i think about people
that are really struggling with
something they often struggle forever
like they never find resolution there
are people in my life who i love very
much and they are still struggling with
things that happened to them or that
they did and it's like yo we're talking
about things that are 50 60 years old
like what is happening
so
certainly the default answer for a
non-meditator is not that you can
obsessively think about it and it will
get better
so what are we doing in meditation that
gives us that change well here's what
we're doing the the
the unenlightened view
i think
is
we should be able to
finish this thing once and for all and
be free of it
you know
and i think the enlightened view
is
going back to it's not what you've
experienced that matters it's how you
relate to it
so that how you're relating to either
the pain you've caused or the trauma
that you that was inflicted upon you
changes so it's still going to be there
it's part of your history you know we
like we until we get alzheimer's we're
not forgetting our history you know uh
so we're carrying it all with us but how
we're carrying it you know holding it
like a baby you know or
you know uh really encumbered by it like
um
ram dust used to say that
after all his spiritual work psychedelic
work you know uh therapy work uh
what he was carrying which had seemed
like these huge gigantic monsters you
know hovering over him had become like
delightful little schmooze
with his language you know so but they
but they're still all him you know
so but i think it's more like that
it's very interesting um
yeah i mean meditation is is really
fascinating there's multiple kinds of
meditation i'll i do what i call just
breathe it's not really mindfulness
because i'm not in there
dealing with demons or anything like
that i'm just this could be there could
be a mindful quality to just breathing
if you're if you're attending uh
uh dispassionately to the breath that
you're being mindful of the breath
but how do how would it ever get to
uh that next level of like
and i mean look i there are enough
things that bother me i certainly don't
think that i um don't have things but
when i meditate that isn't what i
struggle with what i struggle with in
meditation is
um
not that i struggle with it the reason i
meditate is that i can feel what i call
background radiation it's building it's
stress it's anxiety the anxiety for sure
is tied to insecurities and am i going
to be able to do what i'm trying to do
what are the implications of doing it or
not doing it
knowing that achieving is never going to
work but like it's still fun but it's
this weird balance so these are all the
things that like i'm trying to release
is probably the right word but i think
of it as just releasing it in the moment
to not let it like build up and create
this
um
using my words obviously but not
creating this
neurochemical overwhelm so something is
happening it's causing me to
to really get clinical to secrete um
cortisol and so you know maybe my heart
rate is racing my blood pressure is
going up i feel completely uneasy and i
just really want to get back to neutral
man meditation works and i mean works
every time it is crazy it is a i was
actually a little sad because there is
an ongoing debate between my wife and
myself because i want her to meditate
she hates it
and
you said yeah meditation is just not for
everybody but man from the first breath
i took from my diaphragm i was like hold
on like this is regardless of what i'm
thinking about physiologically this is
moving me into a different state and it
feels awesome like i love it i just feel
relaxed
and
because of my work i go through
things at times where there's just so
much money on the line it's very
stressful
and
even in those times i have found that
i'm never more than 45 minutes away from
equanimity and
but it isn't uh it's not a thinking
through
tragedy or anything like that
well not everyone has the tragedy to
think through so you don't have to go
searching for it so
that's that seems just fine the um what
you described as the background
radiation like i think there's a way
that you might be being more mindful
of
uh um
of the background radiation
not just the breath than you think
uh in terms of a reframe
in terms of allowing
that which has accumulated and bothering
you
to
settle down under the umbrella of your
awareness you know which it which it
will do if you
leave it alone
why does it settle and and i think we
have to define settle so when you say
that i interpreted that to mean that i'm
coming to
a peaceful acceptance that it is
not is that what you mean by
you're you're not um
exacerbating it you're not in a tense
relationship with it or ordinarily i
would guess if you're anything like me
in your regular day you'll be wrestling
with it you know like there'll be
something in there that's bothering you
you know
uh and your mind will be going there uh
but what you're describing by centering
yourself on the breath which you love
and which you have a lot of confidence
about but you're aware of the background
radiation you know but you're leaving it
alone
you know you're leaving it alone but
you're not ignoring it you know you're
so you're in that kind of middle zone
that i think meditation brings you to
even if you're not deliberately telling
yourself that that's what you're doing
you're doing it
um so
you know you seems to be seems to be uh
a helpful thing
it's definitely a helpful thing
and i have found there's a one-two punch
for me so meditation is is the way that
i deal with the background radiation
and beliefs are how i
make sure that not too much background
radiation builds up so
um for instance if you think that your
value is determined by
your success your accolades your
acquisitions whatever um
i i have experienced firsthand that that
just is a horrible way to live because
it all feels so fragile and so tenuous
and i'm just like i've got it but i
could lose it and so it's like okay well
that just feels like it's raising my
background radiation so i don't want to
do that so what's another frame of
reference and i do wonder sometimes for
a long time i was like you know i don't
know how i got on the path of what i'll
call
pursuing a growth mindset
and then as i kept like trying to figure
out like what was that first moment i
realized it was reading the dao de jing
and going back to it it
it plants the seeds like obviously
loudzu never would have used those words
but it plants the seeds for
reframing for recognizing that you can
improve even if all you're doing is
improving at living and not being
stressed out and grasping and clinging
and all that and so that began to open
my mind of okay well i suck at this now
but i could actually get better and so
then it became easier to apply that to
other things
so
through beliefs about how i view the
world and the thing that i encourage
myself and others to do is look for the
true and optimistic interpretation
because you don't want to divorce
yourself from reality it won't lead you
anywhere useful but at the same time
there's always an optimistic like the
the the holocaust survivor the child of
the holocaust parents that was one where
i was like yes exactly like even in a
situation like that your parents are
already gone there's nothing more to do
they lived through the holocaust they
lost their kids like oh god like how is
that not just generational trauma upon
generational trauma
and
yet
you can believe there's always an
optimistic and true frame in this which
you found for him
obviously alleviated some of his pain
that's how i get to the don't make
things worse than they need to be by
laying down these what i'll call the the
fundamental beliefs of how the world
works
yeah well you're doing therapy for
yourself
very interesting
therapy man that's uh that's really
fascinating how much
in the book it seems like you use
buddhism a lot in therapy but you
reference a lot that you don't
why don't you
um why don't i use buddhism like why
isn't it just straight up hey over the
door it says buddhist therapy that would
be too um
uh
too alienating for too many people uh
and and i've never wanted to be like a
you know proselytizer even though i sort
of see myself as a translator of
buddhist thought you know into western
psychological language kind of thing but
people come
people come for all kinds of reasons and
need all kind everybody needs something
different
so
where the buddhist thing is helpful
you know it's not always quote unquote
buddhist you know so and then i think
that's part of the fun
of being a therapist
and of being
inspired by these things is if i
really understand them in any kind of
way how can i use them so that people
might not even know that they're
buddhist you know
um so
um
so i'm sort of playing both sides i
think and as you're
i think rightfully recognizing from the
book
and the idea there is just about
alienating them so if they were open to
it you would lean more into it oh if
people are open to what i lean into it
if people want to learn uh you know uh
to meditate or go on a meditation
retreat or i help guide them to uh
places and people that i think are good
um so i'm very encouraging if people
want to be encouraged
you've talked about psychedelics i'm
curious like
so i've never done them well i've
microdosed but i found it
there was
nothing
that i'll call useful in that for me
um which i was sad about but i haven't
yet macro dosed
is it useful what is it doing
um i think it's an open question
i think for a lot of people
um
during the first wave or the wave that i
was aware of when i was um in college
and so on uh p it gave people a
a vision
you know like like the curtains parted
for for a moment and people saw that oh
this wasn't the only way to look at
reality the conventional way you know
that there's more here than we think you
know
our minds are capable of more and the
world is more alive you know that
so i think it was very inspiring for a
lot of people
um
many people couldn't handle it
and it didn't help them at all it
probably hurt them and
what throwing something ugly in their
face without the right foot yeah
freaking them out making just people
getting super anxious or some people
actually getting psychotic on it you
know anything can happen
i think it inspired a lot of people to
try to
bring that spiritual
uh element that they that they glimpsed
in their psychedelic journey to bring it
more into their regular lives so so it's
sort of interesting to me that it's
cycling back again you know
um
and is it mostly a dissolution of the
ego and so you
you're able to
perceive the world from a radically
different lens yeah i think it's
that that's one way one good way of
describing it
yeah
yeah that's
i i am interested and yet i never do
anything to pursue it and i think part
of it is if you told me guaranteed
you're going to have a good trip i'd be
like okay i'm far more interested in
that
but even that i know that there are some
people that do mdma with
psilocybin i think and so it i don't
think anything will guarantee a good
trip but it certainly sets you up about
as well as you can be set up for it
it's your own mind whatever you're doing
so you we all know the um
uh the infinite possibilities of our
minds you know for both good and bad
yeah i don't know if everybody knows
that i think that
you probably have people that man if
they could just drown out their mind
they'd be a lot happier until i
discovered meditation that was very much
my stance was like
god i just want to stop thinking about
this like this is driving me crazy
and
yeah the mind i think is you know it's
super interesting to me because you live
in a nexus where people come to you
because they want help but watching
people struggle that aren't
like they don't seem to either know that
help is possible they don't want the
help maybe it makes them feel weird
certainly
it's only really been recent that being
able to say oh i struggle with anxiety
or depression or whatever it's like oh
man like you know hopefully you get help
before it was like oh jesus yeah you
couldn't even talk about it yeah it was
like mental illness like you're crazy
yeah it was so uncomfortable and i
remember when i first started
experiencing anxiety it was before this
whole revolution where i did not want i
didn't even want my wife to know that i
experienced anxiety for years i kept it
from her until it was getting so bad i
was like i have to tell her just because
she's got to be wondering like what is
happening
and so finally i was like look i get
really anxious but i for sure thought
she was going to think less of me and so
i did not want to tell her it seemed so
unmanly to be anxious
and
yeah because i spent so much time
like i was sort of in private fisticuffs
with my own mind
i certainly didn't think of it as a
an infinite place i was just like
well that's again that's like the the
buddhist dukkha you know like like an
aspect to life that you don't want to
look at that's unsatisfactory you know
that even you even you didn't want your
wife to see
you know and so that's boxing you into
yourself you know in an uncomfortable
way
so it's a good thing you didn't take
psychedelics then i would say oh yeah
that might have
come bursting out of you i can only
imagine thankfully i've my mom somehow
managed to instill an aversion to drugs
and alcohol in me and so i didn't even
have my first drink of alcohol until i
was 26
and even at that was basically my wife
was bribing me to try it
and so and i don't have an addictive
personality so i don't i don't find
myself compelled to pursue that stuff
but yes it is probably a very good idea
that i did not at that time now i assume
you have
tried psychedelics you could assume that
i could assume that yeah fair enough
if you had done them uh is there any
sort of revelatory insight
um
the the revelatory insights that uh that
i've had that have been sustaining for
me have all come in on these meditation
retreats
is it the silence or just the amount of
time you spend meditating
i don't know i i think
the first the first retreat that i went
to
uh where i just did what they told me to
do you know like watch the breath as it
comes in the nostrils and goes out of
the nostrils and you know uh when you're
walking pay attention to the sensation
of your feet as they
lifting moving placing and i just did it
you know
as best i could
and
after three or four days
and it's not like continue it's supposed
to be continuous but it's never
continuous because there's meals and you
you know take a walk and
take a nap and whatever but basically i
was doing a lot of meditation
and
at some point out of nowhere
i was just filled with
you know the most pleasurable
loving
uh blissful
joyful feelings that i'd ever you know
had no idea i was capable of
uh experiencing such uh
um
uh what what adjective could we use not
exactly transcendent because they were
very grounded you know but uh out of
this world kind of feelings only they
were in me uh and you weren't aiming for
that you were just no i had no idea it
was there you know
zero idea that and that like there it
was so i was like oh this meditation
thing is really really work you know
it's really something it's a real thing
um
so
you know that
uh
just turned my
my mind around in a certain way like oh
there really is more to this more to me
more to this more to the whole thing
than i ever could have imagined
so
and you elucidate it very well in the
book the zen of therapy oh thank you
where can people follow you where can
they get the book
i think they can get the book most
places
um and
i have a facebook page if people want to
look at the various posts that
that come up about
you know about
things from the book or talks that i've
given or whatever
that's about it
and what's the facebook page
it's mark epstein md there we go awesome
boys and girls i'm telling you
meditation is one of those mark will
tell you that not everybody is not for
everybody but i think everybody should
at least try it it has changed my life
in ways profound
the xenotherapy is a phenomenal book i
think you will enjoy it very much i
highly encourage you guys to give it a
read and speaking of things that i
highly encourage you to do if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace